The jMonkeyEngine's default IDE ([Integrated Development
Environment](../jme3/beginner/what_s_an_ide)) bases on the [NetBeans
RCP (Rich Client Platform)](http://platform.netbeans.org). There is a
RCP for Eclipse too, so why don't we use Eclipse as IDE for jMonkey?
Well, there's several reasons:

1.  Eclipse uses a proprietary GUI system (SWT), NetBeans uses the
    Java-default AWT implementation for which a high-performance canvas
    display exists in LWJGL/jME3. AWT compatibility allowed e.g.
    integration of plugins like NeoTexture.

2.  Eclipse projects are proprietary and they can not be opened without
    Eclipse. The NetBeans Platform uses the ANT standard which works
    outside the IDE as well, and can be extended by other build
    processes that use ANT (e.g. Android deployment). Furthermore,
    Eclipse can open projects generated by the NetBeans-based
    jMonkeyEngine SDK if needed.

3.  There is no way to extend Eclipse projects properly as there is no
    global concept of a "Project in the RCP.

4.  Eclipse RCP does not offer a Nodes API that allows easy wrapping of
    the SceneGraph into a visual representation.

5.  Eclipse RCP only has commercial GUI editors, NetBeans comes with a
    free AWT GUI editor for designing plugins.

6.  The two Platforms are the same feature-wise.

7.  The core jME3 developers use NetBeans IDE.

:::note
If you come from another IDE and want to try jMonkeyEngine SDK, you can
easily set up the keyboard shortcut mappings to resemble the
configuration you are used to. Profiles exist for Eclipse, IntelliJ and
others. Just go to `Settings → Keymap` and select one of the existing
profiles.
:::
